Welcome back. In this video,
we're going to discuss
denial of service attacks.
A denial of service attack is
an attack that targets
a network or server
and floods it with
network traffic.
The objective of a
denial of service attack,
or a DoS attack, is to disrupt
normal business
operations by
overloading an
organization's network.
The goal of the
attack is to send
so much information
to a network device
that it crashes or is
unable to respond to
legitimate users.
This means that the
organization won't
be able to conduct their
normal business operations,
which can cost them
money and time.
A network crash can
also leave them
vulnerable to other security
threats and attacks.
A distributed denial of service
attack, or DDoS,
is a kind of DoS
attack that uses
multiple devices or servers in
different locations to flood
the target network
with unwanted traffic.
Use of numerous devices
makes it more likely that
the total amount of traffic
sent will overwhelm
the target server.
Remember, DoS stands
for denial of service.
So it doesn't matter what part
of the network the
attacker overloads;
if they overload
anything, they win.
An unfortunate example I've
seen is an attacker who crafted
a very careful
packet that caused
a router to spend extra time
processing the request.
The overall traffic volume
didn't overload the router;
the specifics within
the packet did.
Now we'll discuss network
level DoS attacks
that target network
bandwidth to slow traffic.
Let's learn about three common
network level DoS attacks.
The first is called
a SYN flood attack.
A SYN flood attack is a type of
DoS attack that simulates
the TCP connection
and floods the server
with SYN packets.
Let's break this
definition down a bit
more by taking a closer look at
the handshake process
that is used to establish
a TCP connection between
a device and a server.
The first step in the handshake
is for the device to send
a SYN, or synchronize,
request to the server.
Then, the server responds with
a SYN/ACK packet to
acknowledge the receipt
of the device's request
and leaves a port open for
the final step of the handshake.
Once the server receives
the final ACK packet
from the device,
a TCP connection is established.
Malicious actors can take
advantage of the protocol by
flooding a server with
SYN packet requests for the
first part of the handshake.
But if the number
of SYN requests is
larger than the number of
available ports on the server,
then the server
will be overwhelmed
and become unable to function.
Let's discuss two other
common DoS attacks
that use another
protocol called ICMP.
ICMP stands for Internet
Control Message Protocol.
ICMP is an internet
protocol used by devices
to tell each other about
data transmission errors
across the network.
Think of ICMP like a request
for a status update
from a device.
The device will return
error messages if there
is a network concern.
You can think of this like
the ICMP request
checking in with
the device to make
sure that all is well.
An ICMP flood attack
is a type of DoS attack
performed by an attacker
repeatedly sending ICMP
packets to a network server.
This forces the server
to send an ICMP packet.
This eventually uses up all
the bandwidth for incoming
and outgoing traffic and
causes the server to crash.
Both of the attacks
we've discussed so far,
SYN flood and ICMP flood,
take advantage of
communication protocols
by sending an overwhelming
number of requests.
There are also attacks
that can overwhelm
the server with one big request.
One example that we'll discuss
is called the ping of death.
A ping of death attack is
a type of DoS attack that
is caused when a hacker
pings a system by sending it
an oversized ICMP packet
that is bigger
than 64 kilobytes,
the maximum size for a
correctly formed ICMP packet.
Pinging a vulnerable
network server with
an oversized ICMP packet
will overload the system
and cause it to crash.
Think of this like dropping
a rock on a small anthill.
Each individual ant can
carry a certain amount of
weight while transporting
food to and from the anthill.
But if a large rock is
dropped on the anthill,
then many ants will be crushed,
and the colony is unable to
function until it rebuilds
its operations elsewhere.
Now that's it for DoS
and DDoS attacks.
Coming up, we'll continue to
discuss common network attacks.